# Chi

Chi is a the middle-tier form of Sway, created by adding together points of Tao or Facet Sway. Chi is much more powerful than Tao Sway because of this, and allows Characters that can store and manipulate it to modify aspects of reality as well as themselves.

1 point of Chi is technically created by adding 1 Yin to 1 Yang, but since Yin and Yang contain their own opposites in small amounts, you can also create Chi from 2 Yin or 2 Yang. When converting Facet Sway (or larger amounts of Tao Sway) into Chi the Referee has a choice of methods. It should be noted that the Ref can extend this Banal-Intrepid-Bold power dichotomy to how Annexes work too (with variant rules such as, Skills are Banal unless both Facets match, Powers would be Intrepid unless Root and Channel match then they would be Bold, Super-Annexes are always Bold), and these power states can exist together, so some actions may be Banal while others (often as technologies are invented and commercialised) are Intrepid or Bold. Commonly, what is Banal, Intrepid or Bold for each Facet changes with the Era, if everything technological is Banal during the Stone-Age (except working Stone), then crossing the Atlantic is very difficult and will take weeks if not months. By the modern era you can purchase a ticket and fly in hours, which is definitely Bold, although boat technology is still only Intrepid. In some universes, Magic begins Bold (or even Monstrous) during the golden-age, but falls off in power to an Intrepid medieval silver-age fantasy, or even a Banal "no magic" Grim-dark bronze or iron-age setting.

* **Banal**: In a Banal game the points of Facet Sway or Tao Facet Sway are Reduced, just like a Boon is Reduced to find a Score. So converting 66 points of Yin would generate 13 points of Chi. For a Banal, historical-fantasy, modern thriller, twenty-minutes-in-the-future sci-fi or cyberpunk game (which is more realistic and simulationist) where the Characters are more likely to be Grunts or occasionally low-powered Heroes) the amount of Chi that can be generated by rolling is very low. Getting almost anything done will require an Ordeal.
* **Intrepid**: In an intrepid game, such as a heroic, sci-fi or low-fantasy game, characters are generally Heroes,  Fae hybrids (or commoners) or some Bulmäs Characters, Facet Sway (and Tao Sway if all Facets are Intrepid) is halved to create Chi. Difficulties are generally a little lower for Characters in Intrepid games. This is the normal mode for most genre-mashing T13 games.
* **Bold**: In a Bold campaign you are dealing with super-heroics, space-opera or high-fantasy and Facet sway is equivalent to Chi. If all Facets are Bold then Tao Sway is also equivalent. It can be swapped on a 2 for 2 basis. This is how the strongest super-heroes, færy nobles, arch mages, Yarn-tellers, some powerful Bulmäs and most Plots operate. Difficulties are calculated as Chi and much more is possible with even a Facet roll. This style of play is great for Omniversal Yarn-Teller games, as it allows more to be accomplished with a single roll, reserving Ordeals for serious business.
* **Monstrous**: In a Monstrous campaign you are dealing with extreme genres, such as Kaiju-heroics, weird science-fiction, Grimdark fantasy and Mythic-sagas. Monster Facets are augmented, using their Super-Value rather than Value and Boon rather than Score in most cases. Characters with Monster Facets can convert Facet Sway into Yarn directly (for everyone else and the Monster’s non-monster Facets it still behaves as Bold converting to Chi, it is ), allowing them to perform incredible feats that can easily involve gods dying and stars being torn apart as part of the sideshow, usually though the Monster is cruelly focused on the protagonists.
* **Twisted**: Twisted Campaigns are dark tortuous horror shows with Patron D&aelig;mons directly involved, celestial pantheon soap-operas, or something else, equally weird. This is the realm of Mythology, Weird-Fiction, Cosmic Horror and Loony Toons story-telling, and is actually where Plots live. Facet Sway and Scores can be converted directly into Twists at this level, creating incredible situations becomes relatively easy when even one Proficiency die could open U-space, travel 5 million years, affect a large planet, or create Carnage+ Wounds at low Stakes.

### Chi and Character Types

Chi is the divine breath that powers all living things, and as such can be manipulated to create great works, living beings, and even Divine magical effects (although not often at Intrepid power levels). It can only be directly manipulated by Hero characters such as Mercari, Paradox Warriors, Adult Bulmäs, or Yarn-Tellers such as Solos, or Doom-Weaver Monsters like the Fae.

Chi can be stored by Characters according to their type. The type of the Character also governs how much Chi they Gain from a Chi Gain event (such as a powerful success or Personality Chi Gain).


### Character Chi Classes

| Chi_Class | Character Types | Description | Max_Stored_Chi | Chi Gain | Character Type |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| NPC | Extra / Descendant / Lite / Archetype | Extra Characters are usually NPCs, Lite Characters can be PCs too. Occasionally an artificial intelligence or magic sword may appear as a Descendant too. | Master Annex Maximum Roll | 1 |  |
| Low PC |  | Gritty, low-powered, and generally realistic Characters. They cannot manipulate reality at all. | Personality Boon | Personality Draw | Grunt / Goblin |
| Mid PC |  | Middle-tier Characters who are able to bend and manipulate reality around them in minor ways. There is cross-over with Faery Commoners and Bulm&auml;s at their lower power levels. | Personality Value | Rolled Personality Die / Personality Score | Hero / Demon / Monsters |
| High PC |  | High-powered Characters who can manipulate reality around themselves directly on a whim. | Personality Super-Value | Personality Die as Yarn / Personality Boon | Yarn-Teller / Demon-Lord / Kaiju / Immortals / |



### Rolled Chi

It is also worth noting that when creating Chi with an Annex, the Difficulty is set at 2 (or 1 if a Bold Facet) and the Score rolled may be Halved (for Intrepid Facets) or Reduced to find the Chi generated (for Banal Facets). So if Jo Bloggs wants to generate Chi and uses her "Working Hard" which channels through Rook and rolls 14 (Diff 2 beaten by 12), that grants 6 Chi in an Intrepid Rook game (halving the 12 available if the game had Bold Rook) or 4 Chi in a Banal Rook game (Reducing the 12)).

## Sway Table

The Sway Table is where all this information comes together and you can look up how much Chi is required to do something. Difficulties of tests can of course vary as usual based on the character, setting and genre as the Referee and Yarn-Teller decide.


*Placeholder for custom visual block: [type="swaytable"]*


---
*Copyright CJ Moseley (2026). All rights reserved.*